From tariffs to the Middle East to the
war in Ukraine, President Trump likes to
tout his deal making skills.
>> I could announce uh 50 to 100 deals
right now because, you know, I'm the
shopkeeper and I keep the store.
>> But while Trump's base might agree, many
of his detractors are less
complimentary, coining the term taco to
describe his negotiating style. That's
short for
>> Trump always chickens out.
>> They're saying Trump always chickens
out. What's your response to that?
>> He's definitely not a fan of the term.
You ask a nasty question like that. Uh,
it's called negotiation.
>> So, how good is Trump really as a
negotiator? I'm David Maresy and this
week on the interview, I'm talking to
Chris Voss, a former FBI negotiator
turned hugely popular public speaker and
private coach. Voss's 2016 book, Never
Split the Difference, has sold millions
of copies and brings his FBI experience
to bear on everyday life.
>> When someone feels thoroughly
understood, you release potent forces
for change within them. From his TED
talk to his masterclass series to his
social media life hacks,
>> how to communicate with emotionally
immature adults.
>> Voss says life is all about negotiation.
So, how does Voss rate Trump's
negotiation skills? Here's my
conversation with Chris Voss.
[Music]
Hi, Chris. How are you?
>> Hi, David. Good to see you. I'm good.
How about you?
>> I'm good. I'm good. So, I'm here at the
Times offices in New York and you're in
Las Vegas. Is that right?
>> That's what they tell me. Yeah.
>> Do you gamble?
>> Uh, not in a literal sense. You know,
life is my game, if you will.
>> You know, I I have so many questions for
you, but the first one is how do you
wind up becoming a hostage negotiator?
>> Yeah. Well, you start in a small town in
Iowa.
You go up to I 80 and you make a right
and you end up in New York. I always
like crisis response. I believe in
decision-making. So I was originally a
SWAT guy, was on a SWAT team at
Pittsburgh
and uh transferred to New York, tried
out for the FBI's hostage rescue team,
the FBI's equivalent of the Navy Seals.
uh reinjured an old knee injury and
realized that I want to stay in crisis
response, but I was going to continue to
get injured as a SWAT. So, we had
hostage negotiators. It looked easy. How
hard could it be? I talk to people every
day. And uh I volunteered for the
negotiation team was rejected
and uh um asked what I could do to get
on. Woman that was in charge said um go
volunteer in a suicide hotline. I did
and discovered the magic of emotional
intelligence and then I was hooked. Got
me on the hostage negotiation team and
uh you know my career just I sort of
never looked back after that.
>> Is is there a a story that stands out
from sort of early in your career as a
hostage negotiator um sort of a
situation that really taught you
something?
>> Hostage negotiation. I negotiated the
Chase Manhattan bank robbery.
Um and bank robberies with hostages are
really rare events.
>> When was this roughly?
>> Uh 93.
>> 93.
>> And previous one um significant event
bank robbery with hostages was dog day
afternoon. The lead bank robber at the
Chase Bank said, "The guys I'm with are
so dangerous. I'm scared of them. If
they catch me on the phone with you
guys, I don't know what they're Oh, here
they come. I got to get off the phone."
and he was doing his best to diminish
his influence and his ability
>> behind the scenes because he's calling
all the shots. Like he was putting up a
smoke screen. He was calm. He was in
control of his own emotions the entire
time. And I and I look back on that this
guy bad guy in the bank actually
displayed the characters now
characteristics that I realize of a
great CEO negotiator.
great CEO at the negotiation table is
going to say, "Look, man, I got all
these people I'm accountable to. If, you
know, if I make the wrong decision here,
my board's going to fire me. I just I'm
I'm scared to death of my board." I'm
like, you know, you got to watch out for
the guy who's diminishing his authority
at the table. That's an influential
dude. And that was exactly what this guy
was doing. When did you really start to
understand that certain principles that
you were learning in hostage negotiation
could also work effectively in uh
non-life and death situations like in
business or just in life?
>> Yeah, it was really on on the crisis
hotline. Suicide hotline is just the
application of emotional intelligence.
You know, the magic of empathy not being
sympathy,
not being compassion even, but being a
precursor to compassion. And you start
applying empathy in that form to all
problems and they solve real fast. And
so I just remember thinking,
you know, this empathy,
uh, it's a very caring thing to do.
Shouldn't I be able to do that with
people that matter to me? I mean, why is
it got to be restricted to somebody
who's in crisis?
>> Mhm. I started to experiment with it um
in my personal life, in my professional
life, and every now and then I' i'd hit
a home run that I didn't expect. At one
point in time, I remember being in a
conversation with a person and and she
said to me, "You're reading my mind."
And I'm like, "No, I'm reading your
emotions. It feels like I'm reading your
mind."
And then I began to um really understand
the different levels of it. Like hostage
negotiators across the US will tell you,
"Yeah, it works with bad guys, but it
doesn't work at home.
and I wasn't willing to accept that
premise.
>> Your approach is rooted in uh the term
you use is tactical empathy. Um can you
explain what that is and why it's
effective in negotiation? Yeah, the the
real roots are in Carl Rogers as this
American psychologist 50s 60s7s
and he wrote in his book uh when someone
feels thoroughly understood
you release potent forces for change
within them not agreed with but
understood. Now in the last few years uh
with neuroscience the potent forces for
change are actually the triggering of
neurochemicals in you oxytocin serotonin
when you feel thoroughly hurt so you're
less adversarial and then the
demonstration of understanding
articulation of the other side's point
of view
and purely that no agreement
uh at all just and you can even say this
is how you feel before I disagree with
you this is how you feel you know that
that that That's the application of
empathy. I think I veered away from your
question a little bit.
>> No, no, you're I was just asking what
tactical empathy is.
>> So tactical
>> and how it's effective. Yeah.
>> Yeah. How'd the word tactical get put in
front of it?
>> Because you want to appeal to men
probably.
>> Well, put the word tactical in it.
>> Yeah. That's exactly it. That's, you
know, that's exactly it. Empathy is
thought of as this, oh, I feel bad for
you. Oh, I'm on your side. You know,
this soft spongy thing. Way back when
Hillary runs for for president, she
says, you know, I'm going to use empathy
and
international negotiations and she gets
barbecued for it as if it's weakness.
It's not. So, we threw the word tactical
in front of it, but you know, the same
way you can't teach a Navy Seal yoga
breathing, you got to tell them it's
tactical breathing. And then they go,
"Oh, okay. I'll do that." C. And can you
um sort of maybe give me an example uh
of something that shows how tactical
empathy is effective in a negotiation in
a way that
power or sort of pure rational thinking
or force of argument is not.
>> Yeah. A couple of examples if I can. So
I used to use it all the time when I was
in New York working terrorism. You know,
we had a major case early 90s against
the blind shake, a legitimate Muslim
cleric who also committed a lot of
crimes.
So, we gota we got to talk to Middle
Eastern Muslims, principally Muslims
that are mostly Egyptian, Sudin, mostly,
you know, his community was mostly
Egyptian.
So I'd sit down with them, they got
their guard up, and I go, "You believe
that for the last 200 years there's been
a succession of American governments
that have been anti-Islamic?"
And they'd be like,
"Yeah,
yeah, yeah, that's right."
And then they'd be open to
collaborating.
So that's me trying to capture their
perspective. now.
>> Mhm.
>> Similar example, um, somebody I'm
coaching during the pandemic,
landlords raising a rent. So, from a
tenants point of view, especially if
you're a good tenant, it makes no sense
to raise my rent when I'm having trouble
making a living. The world is shut down
economically. We're all struggling. You
want to raise my rent. The tenant
approaches a landlord and says, "You
know, you want to raise the rent because
your bills aren't going down. Your taxes
aren't going down. You got monthly
utility payments to make. your grocery
prices are going up and the these are
the reasons you want to raise the rent.
And a landlord says, "That's right, but
if keeping you as a tenant, a good
tenant, is what I got to do by not
raising the rent, I'm not going to raise
the rent." So, what happens when you
fully articulate the other side's point
of view? So much defensiveness is
deactivated that at a bare minimum,
they're going to move closer to your
position.
And then if you have a real negotiation,
now you're getting down to what people
really need to to deal with because a
lot of it is how much do they need to
simply be heard and respected and
understood before they make the deal.
>> How much does it matter if the person
across the negotiating table
has empathy for for you? But what if,
you know, they're disrespectful to me or
dismissive of me or just sort of don't
care about where I'm coming from? Is
that an insurmountable roadblock?
>> No, it's not. First of all, um let's
talk about empathy as a skill, not
something as a characteristic.
If you start there, then it frees you up
to use it as a skill with anybody on
earth because the act of trying to
even articulate how the other side is
feeling calms you down. It kicks in a
certain amount of reason in you. It
broadens your perspective. Now, what's
the percentage of people that will never
go there? I need to know if you fall
into what I refer to as the 7enters.
Hostage negotiator is successful roughly
93% of the time, you got to accept the
fact that 7% of the time you're never
going to make a deal with the other
person. You got to smoke that out early.
What are the indicators?
>> Yeah. What are they?
>> The first one is if I apply empathy to
you, your reaction to that tells me who
you are. If I am determined to show you
that I want to be as collaborative with
you as possible
and you reject me at every step, you
fall possibly within a 7enter. Now I
need to know, are you rejecting me
because you're predatory
or because you're overwhelmed by your
own pressure. But I'm now in one of
those two categories cuz this diagnostic
tells me how we're going to proceed.
>> Right? If you're only under pressure and
you can feel no empathy for me because
of the massive amount of pressure you're
under, if I can find a way to deactivate
some of that pressure, I'm going to find
out whether or not we can collaborate.
Case in point, company in the Middle
East that we're coaching their
executives counterpart in South Africa
they've already referred to as the
bully. Shouts at these guys constantly.
They're they're in the midst of the
negotiation and what he's demanding
violates the agreement. They got a
lawyer at the table. count on the lawyer
to inflame the situation.
The lawyer looks at him and says, "Do
you want me to read the terms of the
agreement to you right now?" That's
going to do nothing but make him angry.
And he starts screaming at the guy. He
says, "I don't care what the terms of
the agreement say. I don't care what you
do. I don't care what you say to me."
So, fortunately, they're calm enough in
the moment. The other executive using
his late night FM DJing voice,
>> which you do very effectively already.
It's clear.
>> Yeah. He says, "Uh,
>> yes, you do."
>> Nice. He says to him, "How about if we
just take a break?" So, they're like,
"All right, all right." And they get up,
they take five. He passes the executive
and all. And he says, "Seems like you're
under a lot of pressure." And the guy
goes, "Oh, God, you have no idea. You
guys' project is the only one that's
working for me. And I'm getting killed
on all these other projects, and I'm
worried about losing my job." And I
realized it was inappropriate for me to
take it out on you guys. He's attacking.
He sounded like he was a 7enter. He
sounded predatory. They said he was a
bully, but as soon as they found out he
was under pressure, and he was grateful
that they recognized that, they ended up
working things out.
>> I I want to um stick with the idea of
empathy for for a bit. Um I I don't know
if you saw but there was this uh there
was a quote going around earlier this
year where you know Elon Musk said that
empathy is a fundamental weakness of
western civilization. I think he called
it a a bug that can be manipulated. Do
you give any credence to that kind of
thinking?
>> Well, you know there's a lot of
interesting stuff in there. So the the
first thing is what's your definition of
empathy? And um if it's being able to
articulate the other side's point of
view without agreeing with it or
disagreeing with it, it's not a
weakness. It's it's a highly evolved
uh application of emotional intelligence
analysis.
That's one side. I think that's a little
bit uh if you're describing as a
weakness a bug maybe as Elon was talking
about it in that definition, we differ.
Now the flip side is it manipulation?
>> Yeah. The answer is it's an incredibly
influential set of emotional
intelligence skills.
Similar to a knife, in one person's
hand, it's a murder weapon. In another
person's hand, it's a scalpel and it
saves a life. So, it's an incredibly
powerful tool that relies upon the user.
>> Right. So, on its own, it's value
neutral, basically.
>> Exactly. That's right.
>> Say, look at you. Look at you. Got that
right out of me.
>> I think it's it's a
somewhere near the beginning of of your
book, Never Split the Difference, you
you you write about uh sort of h how
life in so many ways revolves around
negotiation. And I think that really in
the last 10 years or so, um the idea
that negotiation is pervasive has been
really amplified. And I think that's
that's due to one person in particular,
President Trump.
>> And I think it has to do with the way
he's um sort of publicly engaging in
negotiation uh constantly. It's he's
using this giant megaphone of social
media,
>> right?
>> And I feel like uh President Trump's
strategies look like they're all about
threats uh uh and uh asserting leverage
uh and trying to limit the other side's
choices. Um, but when you see Trump
negotiating, what's your assessment?
>> You know, it's really hard uh to get a
solid gauge on him either through a
social media post is limited and lacks
context and what points he trying to
make and then the media's interpretation
of what he said. Like everybody in the
media either loves him or hates him,
which then means the interpretation's
going to be skewed. What I'm struck by
is
really the reaction of people that
talked to him in person and the
outcomes. You know, uh, Prime Minister
of Canada Trudeau, him and Trump have
thrown rocks at each other for years.
Trudeau goes down to Mara Largo, they
meet in person, suddenly they got a
deal. Zalinski, leader of Ukraine,
that rock fight that emerges in the Oval
Office. They're talking to each other at
the Pope's funeral. They got a deal. So
he appears very publicly to to be a
blunt object and then in person he seems
to make deals when he meets people in
person. So what what's going on when he
meets in person? Is is he charming? So
that I think there's emotional
intelligence skills there that don't
translate through the media which he
appears to have a gut instinct for and
an act for. I think when people sit down
with him in person he seems to make
deals. I would say uh I think it's
probably a a oversimplification
to say that you know Trudeau and Trump
sat down and made a deal. But what
effect does the perceptions that uh
someone might have about the person with
whom they're negotiating uh matter in
the negotiation? like the, you know, the
example that comes to mind is it seems
like this this term uh taco Trump always
chickens out seems to get under his uh
skin. So if if someone if has an
awareness that
he's bothered by uh a perception that he
chickens out and also he knows that
there's a perception that maybe he
chickens out.
Will that have an effect on the
negotiations?
>> Well, yeah. First of all, why are people
using that term? because I know it's
getting under his skin,
>> right?
>> So, they're not on his side.
And generally speaking, uh, you know,
most negotiators, most executives who've
been around for a while, there's they,
you know, they start pick up
self-awareness and he seems to be very
aware of those sorts of things.
You know, he he, for a lack of a better
term, he throws a lot of data out there
and then he assesses the data. He throws
stuff out on social media. It's a search
for data. He's provoking responses. He's
mapping the territory. He's getting as
much data back as he possibly can so he
can guide himself. So if you hit
somebody two or three times where
something gets under your skin,
eventually they're going to go like,
"All right, you're trying on me again.
Okay, used to work. Sorry, not anymore.
You taught me a lesson. I learned it."
>> Do you think he's a good negotiator?
>> Uh,
>> you know him a little, right? in
passing, you know, a long time ago. We
actually sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh
sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh
sh sh sh sh share some common roots a
long time ago in a galaxy far far away.
>> What common roots?
>> Um the crisis hotline I volunteered on
was his family's church. I became very
good friends with the minister Arthur
Caliandro, great human being. Arthur was
friends with President Trump. So, um, I
asked Arthur to ask
President Trump if we could use his
apartment at Trump Tower for a
fundraiser for the crisis hotline, and
they graciously let us use the apartment
for the fundraiser, and he graciously
showed up and hosted and was an amazing
host. Uh, it's the only time I've ever
been in person with him at the same
place. He was he was he was phenomenal
host. So, he he was generous at the
time. He was he didn't have to he didn't
have to give us a apartment and he
didn't have to show up. So that was that
was sort of my awareness of him. So your
original question is is is he good as a
negotiator.
>> Yeah.
>> Like I am blown away at the magic he's
working in the Middle East and going out
there and taking chances that no other
American president would have ever
stepped into. Starting with the Abraham
Accords that were done under his
guidance in his first term. Then he
turns around. He recognizes the
president of Syria. Calls for sanctions
to be removed.
He's operating extremely effectively in
the Middle East in a way that no other
president has. And most of my global
attention, not all of it, but most of it
has been focused on the Middle East
because of my terrorism days. You know,
I got a lot of friends, mostly Sunni.
>> Would you say because of your uh
anti-terrorism days?
>> Yeah, there you go. Right. Yeah, I was a
terrorist. One man's terrorist, another
man's freedom fighter. Let's be clear.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, uh I'm blown away by
what he's doing in the Middle East.
>> Do you think the the Trump
administration demonstrates empathy?
>> Yeah, I I think I think he has a highly
evolved understanding of how other
people see things.
>> Tell me more about that. What What makes
you say that? Well, um
the thing with Iran recently, uh when
when we decided to weigh in and um add
to the ordinance being dropped on the
nuclear sites, you know, the reporting
was, and it's hard to tell if this is
accurate, the reporting was um Israel
was thinking about trying to take out
the Iranian leader
and that Trump was against that. Now my
view for that is that smart a number of
reasons. First of all, if you agree to
take out the head of a country,
you decliners open season and fair is
fair, which means they're free to come
after you. To me, there there's a sense
of empathy there. Not necessarily
agreeing, not being on their side, but
if empathy is understanding how somebody
sees it, I think he has a highly evolved
sense of it. Do you think uh he has a
highly evolved sense of emp empathy when
it comes to understanding how other
people see it uh on immigration?
>> Yeah. And then um and then I think he's
making a calculation based on what he
needs to move forward. I I don't think
he's oblivious to how people sees see
sees things. And to lack empathy is to
be oblivious. Now, what decisions that
causes you to make is a whole separate
issue.
>> And uh you're probably going to think
I'm a jerk for asking this.
>> Here we go. Stop. You stop black swan
me. How dare you vos me.
>> How dare you?
>> I just need to stick with with the
question of empathy and Trump and and
immigration just just a little bit more.
So you're talking about it in this
context of you know uh you can have an
emp emp empathic understanding of the
situation but you got to make tough
decisions. Help me understand how
the way ICE functions is the result of
remotely
empathetic understanding of other
people.
>> Yeah. I don't know. I'm not on the
ground with those guys. I don't know
what kind of orders are being given.
Do you want a system where the guy who's
in charge tells you to do one thing and
you say, "No, I'm not doing it." Then
the system breaks down.
>> Well, if if you think the thing is
wrong, you probably should say, "I'm not
doing it." Right.
>> That's you know that that there's
there's really tough questions about
that as an individual.
>> Yeah.
>> And you know, I'm seeing it from a
distance. I I'm not in a position to be
able to offer an informed opinion on it.
And yeah, I'm dodging your question.
Fair, fair enough. Um, and you know, I'm
sure you you must work with people all
the time who who come to you and they're
kind of afraid of negotiation.
>> Yeah.
>> And you know, my hunch is that a lot of
fear of negotiation is is probably
related to just sort of a flatout fear
of conflict.
>> Yes. In really broad general terms, two
out of three people are afraid of
conflict. One of them loves it.
>> I hate those people.
>> But yeah, they're tough, right? you
know, uh, they're hard to deal with.
They beat you up, you know, they call
you names and then they say, "Let's go
have a drink." And you be like, "What?
You just called me names? You want to go
have a drink with me? You got to be
kidding me." Um, yeah. So, people, most
people don't like conflict. Uh, people,
some people are afraid of it. Some
people just see it as being very
inefficient and avoid it because it's
just inefficient. It's a waste of time
and or or they're combative and they
love it. So, as soon as they begin to
see that we can engage in negotiations
and it's it's not a conflict, it's we
can we can make it be collaborative and
it'll be pretty cool. It'll actually be
fun. Then they're down. They're into it.
They're up for it. And um I'm going to
brag, but there's a point to it.
>> Yep.
>> Right. So, the book globally is 5
million copies, sells well in every
country that it's in. Pick a country.
What that tells me is
there's a global appetite to
collaborate. People don't really want to
fight. They would prefer to collaborate.
They're just not sure exactly how to get
there. And the book is kind of a
step-by-step guide in real clear,
concise terms to how to get
collaboration started. As an aside, if
you will, I can't explain why. We've
seen women pick this style of
negotiation up faster than men. Now,
that doesn't mean they're any better at
the higher end. The top end, it's we're
gender agnostic, but we started to see
indicators of women women picking up a
little quicker than men. Let let me uh
change subjects for a second. You know,
there's uh one of my one of my best
friends, the first guy who mentioned
your book to me, he's a an entrepreneur.
who runs his own uh company in Toronto
and he said that uh he can tell when
he's in negotiation with someone who has
also read never split the difference. Uh
and what advice do you have for someone
who's entered into a negotiation and
understands that both sides are are are
playing the same game?
>> Yeah. Okay. I love that question. So,
first of all,
it's not if it's going to happen, it's
when.
You know, the book sold 4 million copies
domestic US. Okay. Okay. Okay.
>> How many books did I sell again? Did you
Could you remind me
>> quite a few?
>> Okay.
>> Those, you know,
>> I got three
>> over 10 years though. So,
>> over 10 years. What are you What are you
doing to me?
>> I just teasing you. I'm just teasing. I
just tease you.
>> But you're going to encounter it. So, my
gut instinct right away is what's it
what's it being used for? Are you trying
to collaborate with me? Are you trying
to cheat me? that I'm going to be able
to smell your intent early on. Are you
using the skills to collaborate with me
to demonstrate understanding to get to
an outcome? I got no problem with that.
We do that with each other all the time.
Everybody on my team uses this stuff on
me. I encourage them to do so.
Somebody starts out and 5 minutes, 15
minutes in, I know they're using the
skills against me.
Okay, now I know who you are. So again,
it's it's a power neutral thing. And if
you're willing to listen, if you're
willing to accept the fact that you
don't want to make a deal with
everybody,
then yeah, I got no problem with you
using the skills.
>> Chris, just before we go, I I have uh my
midyear performance evaluation next
week.
>> Uhhuh.
>> Uh there's something I want. I'm not
going to I shouldn't say what it is, but
what's the number one thing I should be
thinking about when I go into that
evaluation?
>> They see you as selfish.
because they know you're going to come
in there with an ask. Everybody that
walks in wants to get paid more for the
same amount of work. Now, that might not
be what's actually happening,
but empathy is understanding with how
the other side sees things. So, you
start out by saying like, "Look, I'm not
just another selfish employee that just
wants more for the same amount of work."
Now, collaboratively with your boss,
it's not so much where we've been, but
where we going. Now you start talking to
me about where we're going about how
you're going to make my life better
and I got a lot more latitude on what I
could pay you or what I could let you
do. Start thinking about how your boss
evaluates you and then contribute to
that collaboratively.
Not only likely more valuable, but
you're also saving your boss some
thinking. You ain't asking him to figure
out how you pay more. You're saying
here's how you can pay me more. enable
him to do it for you. And when you start
looking at it like that, then it becomes
a completely different conversation.
>> You know, when we talk again, I'm going
to need way more time than we initially
agreed on.
>> You know, never be so sure of what you
want that you wouldn't take something
better.
>> Thank you very much for taking the time
today and I I'll talk to you again in uh
in a little bit.
>> I look forward to it.
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, a few days later, Chris and I
speak again about a painful negotiation
from his personal life. Hi, Chris. How
are you?
>> I'm good, David. Good to be here with
you again today.
>> Yeah, I was thinking uh that in our
conversation so far, um we talked a lot
about your ideas, about your work, but I
thought I still don't feel like I have a
firm handle on you, on who Chris Voss
is, you know.
>> Hold on, hold on. Are you going to make
me cry?
>> I hope so.
Do you do you want to cry?
>> I'm a very emotional guy. You know, you
can't I probably I probably don't look
that way, but you know, deep down
inside, soft, gooey inside, right?
>> All right. Well, let's see if we can get
to that deep down inside. Um, so I feel
like uh just in a sort of a ambient way,
my sense of of
people who uh are really um focused on
ideas about how to uh sort of
effectively manage interpersonal
communication or or uh who develop
systems for getting along with other
people. um you know th those uh
interests don't develop in a vacuum. And
my hunch is that uh
they maybe have something to do with a
desire for control.
Does that ring true for you?
>> I'm not sure. Control, you know, I you
know, I like solutions. I like figuring
things out. I suppose I would have been
attracted to the idea of control in my
younger days.
Um,
>> why is that?
>> Well, the first time I came across a
phrase in a negotiation, the secret to
gaining the upper hand in a negotiation
is giving the other side the illusion of
control. I went like, ah, all right. So,
that resonates with me. And I think that
me being an assertive, I think
assertives like to have control.
Uh, you know, they they want to steer
things and and so that may be a
vulnerability of mine of wanting control
possibly. So yeah, that that there could
be some intertwining of concepts there.
>> What's a negotiation that you lost in
your life that stands out? Not in not in
your work, just in your personal life.
>> In my life.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh
well, you know, one of the biggest ones
I probably lost overall was getting
divorced. And I remember I told my son
just a couple years ago, um there's no
question I could have been a better man
simultaneously. that doesn't mean it
would have changed things. And as we
look back over our lives, I mean, I
think that's a critical issue. Could I
have done it better? And would it have
changed the outcome? Those aren't those
aren't the same things. So, I suppose
probably the the negotiation overall for
my marriage. Uh, I was I I was unaware
of the impact of being direct and honest
and harsh and um could have been a far
better human being, far better man.
Would that have changed things? I don't
know that it would have changed it. you
brought up this uh 7% number in the
context uh so when we were talking
before in the context of hostage
negotiators they're successful roughly
93% of the time unsuccessful roughly 70
uh 7% of the time.
>> Yeah. Um when were you part of the 7%.
>> Oh wow. Um I mean the first the first
time things went really bad was in the
second case I worked in the Philippines
the Burnham Sabaro case.
>> Sorry. Can you say that name again? What
was it?
>> Uh Martin Burnham in the
>> Y
>> GMO Sabo was murdered uh by um Abu Sai.
A lot of Filipinos died. Two out of
three of the Americans that were taken
were ultimately killed. Uh you know that
was a big wakeup call um of to to get
better and that yeah sometimes it's not
going to work out. So that was the first
one. Then there was a string of
kidnappings al-Qaeda dead 2004 time
frame. They were killing everybody they
get their hands on uh to make a point
and they wanted to make it look like
that they were negotiating when they
weren't. It was kidnapping for murder.
>> Where was this? Where did this
>> uh you know there was several in Iraq.
There was one in Saudi Arabia, Paul
Johnson case in Saudi Arabia. You know
they they planned on making a point by
murdering him on deadline, which is what
they did.
>> So when you're working on a negotiation
and a hostage gets killed, how h how do
you move on from that?
It seems to me there would be a pretty
strong impulse to
walk away from the work.
>> Uh there is um and that's the critical
issue
uh between the people that want to hang
in there and get better and and those
that are defeated by failure. A a lot of
people are defeated by failure.
>> Understandably in that instance.
>> Yeah. Understandably. I never I never
blamed anybody that was involved
>> uh to want to bow out and go do
something else or the chance of somebody
getting killed while you were working
was there when Mark Burton was killed
and that was the first hostage that I
ever lost. I thought that was the worst
moment of my life. um until I remember
sitting in the audience on another uh
hostage negotiator hostage negotiators
presentation probably about four years
later and he talked about the trauma of
this infant getting killed and he said
you know I don't know why I keep talking
about this giving a presentation and he
said because something bad that happened
to me on a winter's day
and I remember thinking at the time
happened to you
that wasn't your child. That wasn't that
wasn't your brother. That wasn't your
son.
And then I remember thinking like this
is exactly as self-centered as I've been
why it hurt me. It wasn't a blood
relative. I didn't lose a member of my
family. So at that time, I remember
thinking like, all right, so yeah, it
was bad for you. Was it was worse for
others. Stop feeling sorry for yourself.
I just want to sort of uh take things in
a slightly different direction for for a
minute, but um you know in in Never
Split the Difference, you're somewhat
critical of the idea of compromise. Um
>> somewhat.
>> I'm being friendly.
>> You're being kind.
>> And you know, from from where I'm
sitting, I mean, what do I know about
anything? But I I think, oh gosh, this
seems like uh things might be going a
lot more smoothly if more people were
more comfortable with the idea of
compromise. So what's wrong with
compromise?
>> Well, compromise is guaranteed
lose-lose. Uh there's no way around
that. And so I don't like a strategy
where lose lose.
>> That's just not a matter that's not just
a matter of perspective, though. Oh, I
hate to interrupt, but like why couldn't
a lose-lose in a compromise situation
just as easily be understood as a
win-win?
>> Uh, wow. Okay. Why couldn't it just as
easily be understood as
>> Yeah. Why is it necessarily lose lose?
>> Well, because uh I got to uh compromise
basically is I believe I have an outcome
in mind
and you believe you have an outcome in
mind and so we're not sure which is
right. So, I'm going to water down mine.
You're going to water down yours. And
then we're going to go let's go with two
lesser ideas. Compromises most of the
time is people get lazy. Like if if it
it just it it's a guarantee of me
mediocrity. It's, you know, being
consigned to being a C student and
outcome for the rest of your life. Now,
I suppose that's superior to being an F
student,
but I we were not built to be C students
for the rest of our lives. A metaphor,
steel, and you know, you metallurgists
out there are going to get mad at me
over this, but uh steel is 2% carbon,
98% iron. That's not a compromise.
That's finding out what the best
combination is and and producing
something the world has never seen
before that was far better than either
one of those by themselves were 2% 98%.
That's not 50/50. And so if you really
want to improve things, you can't
compromise. It seems like it would be
a difficult thing mentally to
always be thinking about uh
to always be approaching conversations
and interactions from a goal oriented
standpoint. Is that always how you're
thinking about conversations?
>> Well, uh no. I mean, I got a rough idea
where I want to go
>> every time.
>> Roughly, yeah. I mean, everybody does.
You're human. Vision drives decision.
Nobody engages in anything without
having a vision of where they think it's
going to go. It's how we're wired. You
can't get away from that. Um so to me,
my real uh desire is to try to let go of
a goal because that gives you tunnel
vision. You're that you have blinders on
and to try to discover what's really
possible.
Um I'm not always successful at it. Um,
well, when I can lay back and let an
outcome unfold,
uh, it it it comes much more easily.
>> Um, do you see what we're engaged in as
a negotiation?
>> Probably. Yeah.
Yeah. Um,
you know, I think we each are seeking
the objective is to uncover some kind of
truth that we could share or discover a
truth through the combination of this
conversation. I think we're trying to
uncover something that's worth people
listening to and maybe taking away and
uh using it to make their lives better.
So, yeah, it's a negotiation. That's the
outcome I think we're both after.
>> And did you achieve it? I, you know, I
don't know. Uh, I think there's a pretty
good chance we've said something
together that's going to matter to
somebody. So, even if we only packed one
life, then it was a worthy outcome.
>> Oh, before I let you go, one last thing.
How's a kid from Iowa end up sounding
like a Brooklyn cop?
>> You know, they ask me that every time
I'm in Iowa. Like, where the hell are
you from? Like, you're not from here.
You don't sound like it. Then, then I
sit down in a bar in New York and they
go, "Are you from Wyoming?" You know,
it's crazy. I can't win.
[Music]